<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">מדריך משתמש המקוצר</h1>
    <p>מדריך משתמש זה מכיל מידע אודות כיצד להוריד את Tor, כיצד להשתמש בו, ומה לעשות כאשר Tor אינו מסוגל להתחבר אל הרשת. אם אינך מסוגל למצוא את התשובה לשאלתך במסמך זה, שלח דואל אל help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>אנא הסב את צומת לבך לעובדה כי אנו מספקים תמיכה על בסיס התנדבותי, ואנחנו מקבלים הודעות דוא״ל רבות כל יום. אין שום סיבה לדאגה באם אנו לא חוזרים אליך תיכף ומייד.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">כיצד Tor פועל</h2>
    <p>Tor זוהי רשת של מנהרות מדומות (וירטואליות) אשר מאפשרות לך לשפר את הפרטיות שלך ואת הביטחון עליך באינטרנט. Tor עובדת באופן של שליחת התעבורה שלך מבעד שלושה שרתים אקראיים (הידוע גם בתור <em>ממסרים</em>) בתוך רשת Tor, לפני שהתעבורה נשלחת החוצה אל האינטרנט הפומבי</p>
    <p>The image above illustrates a user browsing to different websites over Tor. The green monitors represent relays in the Tor network, while the three keys represent the layers of encryption between the user and each relay.</p>
    <p>Tor יהפוך את המקור של התעבורה שלך לאנונימי, וכן יצפין כל דבר בינך לבין הרשת Tor. Tor גם יצפין את התעבורה שלך בתוך הרשת Tor, אך אין לו את היכולת להצפין את התעבורה שלך בין הרשת Tor לבין היעד הסופי.</p>
    <p>במידה ואתה מעביר מידע רגיש, למשל כאשר אתה נכנס אל אתר רשת עם שם משתמש וסיסמה, ודא היטב כי אתה מפיק שימוש מן HTTPS (דוגמא <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/, ולא <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/).</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">כיצד להוריד את Tor</h2>
    <p>The bundle we recommend to most users is the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor Browser Bundle</a>. This bundle contains a browser preconfigured to safely browse the Internet through Tor, and requires no installation. You download the bundle, extract the archive, and start Tor.</p>
    <p>קיימות שתי דרכים שונות להשגת התוכנה Tor. באפשרותך לדפדף בתוך <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">אתר הרשת של הפרויקט Tor</a> ולהוריד אותה שם, לחלופין באפשרותך להשתמש בתוכנית GetTor, משיב דוא״ל אוטומטי.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">כיצד להשיג את Tor דרך דוא״ל</h3>
    <p>כדי לקבל את Tor Browser Bundle בשפה האנגלית עבור Windows, שלח דוא״ל אל gettor@torproject.org עם <strong>windows</strong> בתוך גוף ההודעה. באפשרותך להותיר את הנושא ריק.</p>
    <p>באפשרותך גם לבקש את Tor Browser Bundle עבור Mac OS X (רשום <strong>macos-i386</strong>), וגם Linux (רשום <strong>linux-i386</strong> עבור מערכות 32-bit או <strong>linux-x86_64</strong> עבור מערכות 64-bit).</p>
    <p>אם רצונך בגרסא מתורגמת של Tor, רשום <strong>help</strong> במקום. אתה תקבל דוא״ל עם הוראות ורשימה של שפות זמינות.</p>
    <p><strong>Note</strong>: The Tor Browser Bundles for Linux and Mac OS X are rather large, and you will not be able to receive any of these bundles with a Gmail, Hotmail or Yahoo account. If you cannot receive the bundle you want, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and we will give you a list of website mirrors to use.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">Tor עבור טלפונים חכמים</h3>
    <p>באפשרותך להשיג Tor במכשיר Android על ידי התקנת חבילה בשם <em>Orbot</em>. למידע אודות כיצד להוריד ולהתקין את Orbot, אנא עיין בתוך <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en">אתר פרויקט Tor</a>.</p>
    <p>We also have experimental packages for <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">כיצד לאמת אם ברשותך מצויה הגרסא הנכונה</h3>
    <p>טרם הרצת Tor Browser Bundle, עליך לוודא כי קיימת ברשותך הגרסא המתאימה.</p>
    <p>התוכנה אשר אתה מקבל מלווה בקובץ בעל אותו של כשם האגודה וכן עם הסיומת <strong>.asc</strong>. קובץ .asc זה הינו חתימת GPG, וזו תאפשר לך לאמת כי הקובץ אשר הורדת הינו האחד אותו ייעדנו כי תקבל.</p>
    <p>טרם תעמוד לך האפשרות לאמת את החתימה, יהיה עליך להוריד ולהתקין את GnuPG:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Most Linux distributions come with GnuPG preinstalled.</p>
    <p>Please note that you may need to edit the paths and the commands used below to get it to work on your system.</p>
    <p>Erinn Clark signs the Tor Browser Bundles with key 0x63FEE659. To import Erinn's key, run:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net  --recv-keys 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>לאחר ייבוא המפתח, אמת כי טביעת האצבע הינה מדויקת:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg  --fingerprint 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>You should see:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub   2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
      Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630  F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;

uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub   2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>כדי לאמת את החתימה של החבילה שאתה מוריד, הרץ את הפקודה הבאה:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>The output should say <em>"Good signature"</em>. A bad signature means that the file may have been tampered with. If you see a bad signature, send details about where you downloaded the package from, how you verified the signature, and the output from GnuPG in an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Once you have verified the signature and seen the <em>"Good signature"</em> output, go ahead and extract the package archive. You should then see a directory similar to <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong>. Inside that directory is another directory called <strong>Docs</strong>, which contains a file called <strong>changelog</strong>. You want to make sure that the version number on the top line of the changelog file matches the version number in the filename.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">How to use the Tor Browser Bundle</h3>
    <p>After downloading the Tor Browser Bundle and extracting the package, you should have a directory with a few files in it. One of the files is an executable called "Start Tor Browser" (or "start-tor-browser", depending on your operating system).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Please note that it is important that you use the browser that comes with the bundle, and not your own browser.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">מה לעשות כאשר Tor לא מתחבר</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>Your system clock is off</strong>: Make sure that the date and time on your system is correct, and restart Tor. You may need to synchronize your system clock with an Internet time server.</p>
    <p><strong>You are behind a restrictive firewall</strong>: To tell Tor to only try port 80 and port 443, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em> and <em>Network</em>, and tick the box that says <em>My firewall only lets me connect to certain ports</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Your anti-virus program is blocking Tor</strong>: Make sure that your anti-virus program is not preventing Tor from making network connections.</p>
    <p>If Tor still doesn't work, it's likely that your Internet Service Provider (ISP) is blocking Tor. Very often this can be worked around with <strong>Tor bridges</strong>, hidden relays that aren't as easy to block.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">כיצד למצוא גשר</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configuring more than one bridge address will make your Tor connection more stable, in case some of the bridges become unreachable. There is no guarantee that the bridge you are using now will work tomorrow, so you should make a habit of updating your list of bridges every so often.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">כיצד להשתמש בגשר</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">How to use an open proxy</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>The steps below assume you have a functional Tor/Vidalia configuration, and you have found a list of HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5 proxies.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>.</li>
      <li>Click <em>Network</em>. Select <em>I use a proxy to access the Internet</em>.</li>
      <li>On the <em>Address</em> line, enter the open proxy address. This can be a hostname or an IP Address.</li>
      <li>Enter the port for the proxy.</li>
      <li>Generally, you do not need a username and password. If you do, enter the information in the proper fields.</li>
      <li>Choose the <em>Type</em> of proxy you are using, whether HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Push the <em>OK</em> button. Vidalia and Tor are now configured to use a proxy to access the rest of the Tor network.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Frequently Asked Questions</h2>
    <p>This section will answer some of the most common questions. If your question is not mentioned here, please send an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Unable to extract the archive</h3>
    <p>If you are using Windows and find that you cannot extract the archive, download and install <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>פתח את <em>המחשב שלי</em></li>
      <li>לחץ על <em>כלים</em> ובחר <em>אפשרויות תיקיה...</em> בתפריט</li>
      <li>לחץ על הכרטיסייה <em>תצוגה</em></li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>פתח <em>מחשב</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>לחץ על הכרטיסייה <em>תצוגה</em></li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>פתח <em>מחשב</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>לחץ על הכרטיסייה <em>תצוגה</em></li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia asks for a password</h3>
    <p>You should not have to enter a password when starting Vidalia. If you are prompted for one, you are likely affected by one of these problems:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>For more information, see the <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> on the Tor Project website.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Flash does not work</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, Flash, Java, and other plugins are currently disabled for Tor. Plugins operate independently from Firefox and can perform activity on your computer that ruins your anonymity.</p>
    <p>Most YouTube videos work with HTML5, and it is possible to view these videos over Tor. You need to join the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 trial</a> on the YouTube website before you can use the HTML5 player.</p>
    <p>Note that the browser will not remember that you joined the trial once you close it, so you will need to re-join the trial the next time you run the Tor Browser Bundle.</p>
    <p>Please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> for more information.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">ברצוני להשתמש בדפדפן אחר</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, we recommend that you only browse the web through Tor using the Tor Browser Bundle. It is technically possible to use Tor with other browsers, but by doing so you open yourself up to potential attacks.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">מדוע Tor איטי</h3>
    <p>Tor can sometimes be a bit slower than your normal Internet connection. After all, your traffic is sent through many different countries, sometimes across oceans around the world!</p>
  </body>
</html>
