<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">Короткий посібник користувача</h1>
    <p>Цей посібник користувача містить інформацію про те, як завантажити та використовувати Tor, про те, що робити, коли Tor не може під'єднатися до мережі. Якщо ви не можете знайти відповідь на своє питання у цьому посібнику, напишіть електронного листа на адресу help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Майте на увазі, що ми надаємо технічну підтримку на волонтерських засадах, та щодня отримуємо багато електронних листів. Нема причин турбуватися, якщо ми не відповімо вам відразу.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">Як працює Tor</h2>
    <p>Tor є мережа віртуальних тунелів, яка дозволяє поліпшити Вашу конфіденційність і безпеку в Інтернеті. Перш ніж трафік потрапить у публічний Інтернет, Tor надсилає трафік через три випадкових сервери (також відомі як <em>ретранслятори</em>), що знаходяться у його мережі.</p>
    <p>На рисунку вище зображено як виглядає перегляд веб-сайтів через мережу Tor. Зелені монітори представляють собою ретранслятори в мережі Tor, в той час як три ключа - це шари шифрування між користувачем і кожним ретранслятором.</p>
    <p>Tor will anonymize the origin of your traffic, and it will encrypt everything between you and the Tor network. Tor will also encrypt your traffic inside the Tor network, but it cannot encrypt your traffic between the Tor network and its final destination.</p>
    <p>Якщо Ви працюєте з важливою інформацією, наприклад, Ви вводите ім'я користувача і пароль для входу на веб-сайт, переконайтеся, що Ви використовуєте HTTPS (наприклад <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/, а не <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/).</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">Як завантажити Tor</h2>
    <p>Пакет, який ми рекомендуємо для більшості користувачів розміщений за посиланням <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor Browser Bundle</a>. Цей комплект містить браузер, заздалегідь налаштований безпечно переглядати Інтернет через Tor, і не вимагає установки. Ви скачуєте пакет, розпаковуєте архів і запускаєте Tor.</p>
    <p>Є два різні способи отримати програмне забезпечення Tor. Ви можете або перейти за посиланням <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">Tor Project website</a> і завантажити його там, або використати GetTor через автовідповідач електронної пошти .</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">Як отримати Tor через електронну пошту</h3>
    <p>Для отримання англійського пакету Tor-браузера для Windows, надішліть лист електронною поштою на адресу gettor@torproject.org зі словом <strong>windows</strong> в тілі повідомлення. Ви можете залишити заголовок листа порожнім.</p>
    <p>Ви також можете запросити пакет Tor-браузера для Mac OS X (написавши <strong>macos-i386</strong>) і Linux (написавши <strong>linux-i386</strong> для 32-бітних систем або <strong>linux-x86_64</strong> для 64-бітних систем).</p>
    <p>Якщо Ви бажаєте отримати перекладену версію Tor, напишіть <strong>help</strong>. Після цього Вам буде надіслано повідомлення з інструкціями і списком доступних мов.</p>
    <p><strong>Note</strong>: The Tor Browser Bundles for Linux and Mac OS X are rather large, and you will not be able to receive any of these bundles with a Gmail, Hotmail or Yahoo account. If you cannot receive the bundle you want, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and we will give you a list of website mirrors to use.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">Tor для смартфонів</h3>
    <p>You can get Tor on your Android device by installing the package named <em>Orbot</em>. For information about how to download and install Orbot, please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en">Tor Project website</a>.</p>
    <p>У нас також є тестові пакети для <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">Як перевірити, що Ви маєте правильну версію</h3>
    <p>Перед запуском Tor Browser Bundle, Ви повинні переконатися, що у Вас встановлена правильна версія.</p>
    <p>The software you receive is accompanied by a file with the same name as the bundle and the extension <strong>.asc</strong>. This .asc file is a GPG signature, and will allow you to verify the file you've downloaded is exactly the one that we intended you to get.</p>
    <p>Перш ніж Ви зможете перевірити підпис, Вам доведеться завантажити і встановити GnuPG:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Більшість Linux дистрибутивів включає попередньо встановлений GnuPG.</p>
    <p>Зверніть увагу, що Вам може знадобитися відредагувати шляхи і команди, що використовуються нижче, щоб усе запрацювало на Вашій системі.</p>
    <p>Ерін Кларк підписує Tor Browser Bundles ключем 0x63FEE659. Для імпортування ключа Еріна запустіть:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net --recv-keys 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Після імпортування ключа, перевірте, що відбитки пальців правильні:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --fingerprint 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Ви повинні побачити:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub 2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630 F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;

uid Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub 2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Для того, щоб перевірити сигнатуру пакунку, який ви завантажили, виконайте наступну команду:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>The output should say <em>"Good signature"</em>. A bad signature means that the file may have been tampered with. If you see a bad signature, send details about where you downloaded the package from, how you verified the signature, and the output from GnuPG in an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Once you have verified the signature and seen the <em>"Good signature"</em> output, go ahead and extract the package archive. You should then see a directory similar to <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong>. Inside that directory is another directory called <strong>Docs</strong>, which contains a file called <strong>changelog</strong>. You want to make sure that the version number on the top line of the changelog file matches the version number in the filename.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">Як використовувати Tor Browser Bundle</h3>
    <p>Після завантаження Tor Browser Bundle і розпакування пакету, у Вас з'явиться директорія з декількома файлами всередині. Один з файлів є виконуваним і називається "Start Tor Browser" (або "start-tor-browser", в залежності від Вашої операційної системи).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Зверніть увагу на те, що дуже важливо, щоб Ви використовували браузер, який поставляється з пакетом, а не свій власний браузер.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">Що робити, якщо Tor не підключається до мережі</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>Your system clock is off</strong>: Make sure that the date and time on your system is correct, and restart Tor. You may need to synchronize your system clock with an Internet time server.</p>
    <p><strong>You are behind a restrictive firewall</strong>: To tell Tor to only try port 80 and port 443, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em> and <em>Network</em>, and tick the box that says <em>My firewall only lets me connect to certain ports</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Your anti-virus program is blocking Tor</strong>: Make sure that your anti-virus program is not preventing Tor from making network connections.</p>
    <p>If Tor still doesn't work, it's likely that your Internet Service Provider (ISP) is blocking Tor. Very often this can be worked around with <strong>Tor bridges</strong>, hidden relays that aren't as easy to block.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">Як знайти міст</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configuring more than one bridge address will make your Tor connection more stable, in case some of the bridges become unreachable. There is no guarantee that the bridge you are using now will work tomorrow, so you should make a habit of updating your list of bridges every so often.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">Як знайти міст</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">Як використовувати open proxy</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>The steps below assume you have a functional Tor/Vidalia configuration, and you have found a list of HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5 proxies.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Відкрийте панель налаштувань Vidalia, натисніть <em>Налаштування</em>.</li>
      <li>Натисніть <em>Мережа</em>. Виберіть <em>Я використовую проксі для доступу в Інтернет</em>.</li>
      <li>У стрічці <em>Адреса</em> введіть відкритий адрес проксі. Це може бути ім'я хосту або IP-адреса.</li>
      <li>Введіть порт proxy.</li>
      <li>Як правило, Вам не потрібно вводити ім'я користувача та пароль. Якщо ця інформація все ж таки знадобиться, то введіть її у відповідні поля.</li>
      <li>Оберіть <em>Тип</em> проксі, який Ви використовуєте HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4 або SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Натисніть кнопку <em>OK</em>. Vidalia і Tor тепер налаштовані на використання проксі для доступу до іншої частини мережі Tor.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Питання, які часто ставляться</h2>
    <p>У цьому розділі розміщені відповіді на деякі з найбільш поширених питань. Якщо Ваше питання не згадується, будь ласка, надішліть листа на help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Не вдається відкрити архів</h3>
    <p>Якщо Ви використовуєте Windows, і виявилося, що Ви не можете розпакувати архів, завантажте і встановіть <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Відкрити <em>Мій комп'ютер</em></li>
      <li>Натисніть на <em>Інструменти</em>&gt; та виберіть у меню <em>Властивості папки...</em></li>
      <li>Натисніть на вкладку <em>Перегляд</em></li>
      <li>Зніміть відмітку <em>Приховувати розширення для зареєстрованих типів файлів</em> і натисніть <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Відкрити <em>Мій комп'ютер</em></li>
      <li>Натисніть на <em>Організувати</em> і оберіть у меню <em>Директорію і налаштування пошуку</em></li>
      <li>Натисніть на вкладку <em>Перегляд</em></li>
      <li>Зніміть відмітку <em>Приховувати розширення для зареєстрованих типів файлів</em> і натисніть <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Відкрити <em>Мій комп'ютер</em></li>
      <li>Натисніть на <em>Організувати</em> і оберіть у меню <em>Директорію і налаштування пошуку</em></li>
      <li>Натисніть на вкладку <em>Перегляд</em></li>
      <li>Зніміть відмітку <em>Приховувати розширення для зареєстрованих типів файлів</em> і натисніть <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia просить пароль</h3>
    <p>Ви не повинні вводити пароль при запуску Vidalia. Якщо у Вас його запитують, то ймовірно Ви стикнулися з однією з проблем:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>Для отримання додаткової інформації, перегляньте <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> на сторінці Tor Project.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Flash не працює</h3>
    <p>З міркувань безпеки, Flash, Java та інші плагіни в даний час відключені для Tor. Плагіни працюють незалежно від Firefox і можуть здійснювати на Вашому комп'ютері діяльність, що порушує анонімність.</p>
    <p>Більшість відео у YouTube працює з HTML5, і ці відео можна дивитися через Tor. Вам потрібно увімкнути <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 тріал</a> на сайті YouTube, перш ніж Ви зможете використовувати HTML5 плеєр.</p>
    <p>Зверніть увагу, що браузер не пам'ятатиме, що Ви приєдналися до тріалу, коли Ви його закриєте, тому Вам буде необхідно знову приєднатися до тріалу наступного разу при запуску Tor Browser Bundle.</p>
    <p>Будь-ласка, перегляньте <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> для отримання додаткової інформації.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">Я хочу використовувати інший браузер</h3>
    <p>У цілях безпеки, ми рекомендуємо Вам переглядати веб-сторінки тільки через Tor з використанням Tor Browser Bundle. Технічно можливо використовувати Tor з іншими браузерами, проте роблячи це, Ви наражаєтесь на потенційні атаки.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">Чому Tor повільний</h3>
    <p>Tor іноді може бути дещо повільнішим, ніж звичайне інтернет-з'єднання. Адже Ваш трафік передається через багато різних країн по всьому світу!</p>
  </body>
</html>
