<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">Petunjuk pengunaan singkat</h1>
    <p>Petunjuk pengunaan ini mengandung informasi mengenai cara untuk mengunduh Tor, bagaimana menggunakannya, dan apa yang harus dilakukan ketika Tor tidak bisa terhubung dengan jaringan. jika Anda tidak dapat menemukan jawaban atas pertanyaan anda dalam dokumen ini, email ke help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Harap diingat bahwa kami hanya menyediakan bantuan berdasarkan kesukarelaan, dan kami menerima banyak email setiap hari. Anda tidak perlu khawatir jika kami tidak bisa membalas email Anda secara langsung.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">Bagaimana Tor bekerja
</h2>
    <p>Tor adalah sebuah jaringan dari terowongan virtual yang memperbolehkan Anda untuk meningkatkan privacy Anda dan keamanan dalam internet. Tor bekerja dengan mengirimkan traffic melalui tiga server yang acak (dikenal sebagai relay) di dalam jaringan Tor, sebelum traffic itu dikirimkan ke internet publik.</p>
    <p>iatas mengilustrasikan seorang pengguna berselancar ke situs-situs yang beragam melalui Tor. Layar hijau merepresentasikan relay dalam jaringan Tor, sementara tiga kunci merepresentasikan lapisan enkripsi diantara pengguna dan setiap relay.</p>
    <p>Tor akan menganonimkan asal traffic Anda, dan akan mengenkripsi semua antara Anda dan jaringan Tor. Tor juga akan mengenkripsi traffic Anda di dalam jaringan Tor, tapi tidak bisa mengenkripsi antara jaringan Tor dan tujuan akhirnya.</p>
    <p>Jika Anda mengkomunikasikan informasi yang sensitif, contohnya ketika Anda masuk ke dalam situs dengan ID pengguna dan kata sandi, pastikan anda menggunakan HTTPS (e.g. <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/, not <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/).</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">Bagaimana menunduh Tor</h2>
    <p>Paket yang kami rekomendasikan kepada sebagian besar pengguna adalah <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html"> paket browser Tor</a>. Paket ini berisikan browser yang sudah dikonfigurasikan untuk menjelajah internet melalui Tor, dan tidak memerlukan pemasangan. Anda download paketnya, ekstrak arsipnya dan jalankan Tor.</p>
    <p>Terdapat dua cara untuk mendapatkan perangkat lunak Tor, Anda dapat menjelajah ke <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">Tor Project website</a> dan mengunduhnya disana, atau Anda dapat menggunakan GetTor, penjawab email otomatis.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">Bagaimana mendapatkan Tor melalui email</h3>
    <p>Untuk mendapatkan paket Browser Tor berbahasa Inggris untuk Windows, kirim email ke gettor@torproject.org dengan <strong>windows</strong> pada bagian isi surat. Anda dapat membiarkan bagian subyek kosong.</p>
    <p>Anda juga dapat meminta paket browser Tor untuk Mac OS X (tulis <strong>macos-i386</strong>), dan Linux (tulis <strong>linux-i386</strong> for 32-bit systems or <strong>linux-x86_64</strong> for 64-bit systems).</p>
    <p>Jika Anda ingin mendapatkan Tor yang sudah dialih-bahasakan, tulis <strong>help</strong>. Anda akan menerima email dengan instruksi dan daftar bahasa yang tersedia.</p>
    <p><strong>Note</strong>: browser Tor untuk Linux dan Mac OS X berukuran cukup besar, dan Anda tidak dapat menerimanya dengan akun Gmail, Hotmail atau Yahoo. jika Anda tidak dapat menerima paket yang Anda inginkan, kirim email ke help@rt.torproject.org dan kami akan memberikan kepada Anda daftar situs bayangan untuk digunakan.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">Tor untuk ponsel pintar</h3>
    <p>Anda dapat memperoleh Tor untuk perangkat Android dengan menginstal paket yang bernama <em>Orbot</em>. Untuk informasi bagaimana mengunduh dan menginstal Orbot, silahkan lihat <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en"> website project Tor </a>.</p>
    <p>We also have experimental packages for <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">Bagaimana memastikan anda memiliki versi yang tepat</h3>
    <p>Sebelum menjalankan paket browser Tor, Anda harus yakin bahwa Anda memiliki versi yang tepat.</p>
    <p>Perangkat lunak yang Anda terima disertai dengan file dengan nama yang sama seperti paket dan ekstensi <strong>.asc</strong>. file .asc ini adalah signature GPG, dan Akan mengizinkan anda untuk memastikan file yang sudah Anda unduh adalah sama seperti yang Anda maksudkan.</p>
    <p>Sebelum Anda dapat memastikan signature tersebut, Anda harus mengunduh dan menginstal GnuPG:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Most Linux distributions come with GnuPG preinstalled.</p>
    <p>Harap dicatat bahwa Anda mungkin harus mengedit path dan perintah yang digunakan dibawah agar dapat bekerja di sistem Anda.</p>
    <p>Erinn Clark menandai paket browser tor dengan kunci 0x63FEE659. untuk memasukan kunci Erinn, jalankan:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net --recv-keys 0x63FEE659⏎ </code>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net --recv-keys 0x63FEE659⏎ </code>
    </pre>
    <p>setelah memasukan kunci, pastikan bahwa sidik jarinya benar:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --fingerprint 0x63FEE659⏎ </code>
    </pre>
    <p>Anda akan melihat:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub   2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
      Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630  F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;

uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub   2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Untuk memastikan signature dari paket yang sudah anda unduh, jalankan perintah berikut:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe⏎ </code>
    </pre>
    <p>Hasilnya seharusnya berisikan <em>"Good signature"</em>. Signature yang salah mengindikasikan bahwa file rusak. jika Anda mendapatkan hasil yang salah, kirim detail mengenai darimana Anda mengunduh paket tersebut, bagaimana Anda memastikan signature, dan hasil dari GnuPG dalam email ke help@rt.torproject.org</p>
    <p>Once you have verified the signature and seen the <em>"Good signature"</em> output, go ahead and extract the package archive. You should then see a directory similar to <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong>. Inside that directory is another directory called <strong>Docs</strong>, which contains a file called <strong>changelog</strong>. You want to make sure that the version number on the top line of the changelog file matches the version number in the filename.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">Bagaimana cara untuk menggunakan Bundel Peramban Tor</h3>
    <p>After downloading the Tor Browser Bundle and extracting the package, you should have a directory with a few files in it. One of the files is an executable called "Start Tor Browser" (or "start-tor-browser", depending on your operating system).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Harap di ingat penting untuk anda menggunakan peramban yang bersama dalam satu bundel, bukan peramban anda sendiri.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">Apa yang harus dilakukan ketika Tor tidak terhubung</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>Your system clock is off</strong>: Make sure that the date and time on your system is correct, and restart Tor. You may need to synchronize your system clock with an Internet time server.</p>
    <p><strong>You are behind a restrictive firewall</strong>: To tell Tor to only try port 80 and port 443, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em> and <em>Network</em>, and tick the box that says <em>My firewall only lets me connect to certain ports</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Your anti-virus program is blocking Tor</strong>: Make sure that your anti-virus program is not preventing Tor from making network connections.</p>
    <p>If Tor still doesn't work, it's likely that your Internet Service Provider (ISP) is blocking Tor. Very often this can be worked around with <strong>Tor bridges</strong>, hidden relays that aren't as easy to block.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">How to find a bridge</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configuring more than one bridge address will make your Tor connection more stable, in case some of the bridges become unreachable. There is no guarantee that the bridge you are using now will work tomorrow, so you should make a habit of updating your list of bridges every so often.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">How to use a bridge</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">Bagaiman cara untuk menggunakan proxy terbuka</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>The steps below assume you have a functional Tor/Vidalia configuration, and you have found a list of HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5 proxies.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>.</li>
      <li>Click <em>Network</em>. Select <em>I use a proxy to access the Internet</em>.</li>
      <li>On the <em>Address</em> line, enter the open proxy address. This can be a hostname or an IP Address.</li>
      <li>Enter the port for the proxy.</li>
      <li>Generally, you do not need a username and password. If you do, enter the information in the proper fields.</li>
      <li>Choose the <em>Type</em> of proxy you are using, whether HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Push the <em>OK</em> button. Vidalia and Tor are now configured to use a proxy to access the rest of the Tor network.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Frequently Asked Questions</h2>
    <p>This section will answer some of the most common questions. If your question is not mentioned here, please send an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Unable to extract the archive</h3>
    <p>If you are using Windows and find that you cannot extract the archive, download and install <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>My Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Tools</em> and choose <em>Folder Options...</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia asks for a password</h3>
    <p>You should not have to enter a password when starting Vidalia. If you are prompted for one, you are likely affected by one of these problems:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>For more information, see the <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> on the Tor Project website.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Flash does not work</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, Flash, Java, and other plugins are currently disabled for Tor. Plugins operate independently from Firefox and can perform activity on your computer that ruins your anonymity.</p>
    <p>Most YouTube videos work with HTML5, and it is possible to view these videos over Tor. You need to join the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 trial</a> on the YouTube website before you can use the HTML5 player.</p>
    <p>Note that the browser will not remember that you joined the trial once you close it, so you will need to re-join the trial the next time you run the Tor Browser Bundle.</p>
    <p>Please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> for more information.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">I want to use another browser</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, we recommend that you only browse the web through Tor using the Tor Browser Bundle. It is technically possible to use Tor with other browsers, but by doing so you open yourself up to potential attacks.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">Why Tor is slow</h3>
    <p>Tor can sometimes be a bit slower than your normal Internet connection. After all, your traffic is sent through many different countries, sometimes across oceans around the world!</p>
  </body>
</html>
