<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">Krótki Podręcznik Użytkownika</h1>
    <p>Podręcznik użytkownika zawiera informacje na temat tego, jak pobrać Tora, jak go używać, i co zrobić, jeśli Tor nie może nawiązać połączenia z Internetem. Jeśli nie możesz znaleźć odpowiedzi na żadne ze swoich pytań, wyślij nam e-mail na adres: help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Weż jednak pod uwagę, że wsparcie techniczne jest udzielane na zasadzie dobrowolności, a dostajemy wiele listów e-mail każdego dnia. Prosimy więc o cierpliwość, bo może być tak, że nie skontaktujemy się z Tobą natychmiast.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">Jak działa Tor</h2>
    <p>Tor jest siecią wirtualnych tuneli, które pozwalają na poprawę prywatności i bezpieczeństwa w Internecie. Tor działa, wysyłając ruch poprzez trzy losowe serwery (lub inaczej: <em>przekaźniki</em>) w sieci Tor; następnie ruch jest wysyłany do publicznego Internetu.</p>
    <p>Obrazek powyżej ilustruje użytkownika przeglądającego różne strony internetowe za pomocą sieci Tor. Monitory zielone reprezentują przekaźniki sieci Tor, natomiast trzy klucze odpowiadają warstwom szyfrowania między użytkownikiem a każdym przekaźnikiem.</p>
    <p>Tor jest anonimowym źródłem przesyłanych informacji i szyfruje wszystko między Tobą i siecią Tor. Szyfruje również dane wewnątrz własnej sieci, ale nie może szyfrować danych między własną siecią, a punktem docelowym.</p>
    <p>Jeśli przesyłasz poufne informacje, na przykład podczas logowania do strony internetowej zawierającej nazwę użytkownika i hasło, upewnij się, że używasz HTTPS (na przykład <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/, a nie <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/).</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">Jak pobrać Tora</h2>
    <p>Pakiet zalecany dla większości użytkowników to <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor Browser Bundle</a>. Zawiera on przeglądarkę WWW, prekonfigurowaną do bezpiecznego przeglądania Internetu za pomocą Tora, i nie wymaga żadnej instalacji. Trzeba tylko pobrać pakiet, wyodrębnić archiwum, i uruchomić Tora.</p>
    <p>Istnieją dwa różne sposoby, aby pobrać pakiet oprogramowania Tora. Można albo przejść do witryny <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">Tor Project</a> i pobrać go stamtąd, albo użyć autorespondera e-mail <em>GetTor</em>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">Jak pobrać Tora poprzez e-mail</h3>
    <p>Aby otrzymać <strong>przeglądarkę WWW z oprogramowaniem Tor</strong> (ang. <em>Tor Browser Bundle</em>) do systemu Windows, wyślij e-mail do gettor@torproject.org z tekstem <strong>windows</strong> w treści listu. Temat możesz pozostawić pusty.</p>
    <p>Taką samą przeglądarkę z oprogramowaniem możesz otrzymać do systemu Mac OS X (napisz <strong>macos-i386</strong>), i Linux (napisz <strong>linux-i386</strong> do systemów 32-bitowych lub <strong>linux-x86_64</strong> do systemów 64-bitowych).</p>
    <p>Jeśli chciałbyś przetłumaczoną wersję Tora, napisz <strong>help</strong> w treści wiadomości. Otrzymasz wtedy e-mail z instrukcjami, i listą dostępnych języków.</p>
    <p><strong>Uwaga:</strong> Pakiety <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor Browser Bundle</a> do Linuksa i Mac OS X są raczej duże, więc mogą być problemy z odebraniem ich za pomocą konta Gmail, Hotmail lub Yahoo. Jeśli nie będziesz mógł pobrać wybranego pakietu, wyślij e-mail na adres: help@rt.torproject.org, a my podamy Ci listę serwerów lustrzanych (ang. <em>mirrors</em>), zawierających pakiety z Torem.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">Tor do smartfonów</h3>
    <p>Tor może być zainstalowany także na Androidzie. Odpowiedni pakiet instalacyjny nosi nazwę <em>Orbot</em>. Aby dowiedzieć się, jak pobrać i zainstalować <em>Orbot</em>, proszę przejść na <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en">witrynę Tor Project</a>.</p>
    <p>We also have experimental packages for <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">Jak zweryfikować, że mamy właściwą wersję</h3>
    <p>Przed uruchomieniem <em>Tor Browser Bundle</em> upewnij się, ze masz właściwą wersję.</p>
    <p>Zapisany pakiet oprogramowania posiada plik o tej samej nazwie co pakiet, z rozszerzeniem<strong>.asc</strong>. Plik .asc jest sygnaturą GPG, która pozwala zweryfikować, czy pobrany pakiet jest dokładnie taki sam jak ten, który zamierzaliśmy pobrać.</p>
    <p>Przed weryfkacją sygnatury trzeba pobrać i zainstalować GnuPG:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Większość dystrybucji systemu Linux posiada już preinstalowany GnuPG.</p>
    <p>Aby weryfikacja GPG przebiegła właściwie, czasami trzeba wyedytować ścieżki dostępu, oraz zastosować poniższe polecenia:</p>
    <p>Erinn Clark podpisuje Tor Browser Bundles kluczem 0x63FEE659. Aby zaimportować klucz Erinn'a, uruchom w konsoli polecenie:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net  --recv-keys 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Po zaimportowaniu klucza, zweryfikuj, czy "odcisk palca" (ang. <em>fingerprint</em>) jest poprawny:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg  --fingerprint 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Powinien pojawić się ciąg znaków:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub   2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
      Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630  F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;

uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub   2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Aby zweryfikować sygnaturę pobranego pakietu, trzeba w konsoli uruchomić polecenie:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Powinien pojawić się komunikat wynikowy <em>"Good signature" (Dobra sygnatura)</em>. Jeśli pojawi się komunikat <em>"Bad signature" (Zła sygnatura)</em>, prosimy o przesłanie szczegółów w e-mailu na adres: help@rt.torproject.org (skąd został pobrany pakiet, w jaki sposób zweryfikowano sygnaturę, ciąg znaków, które zostały wyświetlone w konsoli podczas procesu weryfikacji).</p>
    <p>Jak tylko zostanie zweryfikowana sygnatura i pojawi się komunikat wynikowy <em>"Good signature"</em>, można wyodrębnić archiwum pakietu. Po rozpakowaniu, powinien pojawić sie katalog o nazwie zbliżonej do tej: <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong>. Wewnątrz katalogu jest kolejny katalog o nazwie <strong>Docs</strong>, który zawiera plik o nazwie <strong>changelog</strong>. Warto sprawdzić, czy numer wersji w górnej linii pliku changelog zgadza się z numerem wersji w nazwie pliku.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">Jak używać Tor Browser Bundle</h3>
    <p>After downloading the Tor Browser Bundle and extracting the package, you should have a directory with a few files in it. One of the files is an executable called "Start Tor Browser" (or "start-tor-browser", depending on your operating system).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Please note that it is important that you use the browser that comes with the bundle, and not your own browser.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">Co robić, gdy Tor nie łączy się z siecią</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>Your system clock is off</strong>: Make sure that the date and time on your system is correct, and restart Tor. You may need to synchronize your system clock with an Internet time server.</p>
    <p><strong>You are behind a restrictive firewall</strong>: To tell Tor to only try port 80 and port 443, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em> and <em>Network</em>, and tick the box that says <em>My firewall only lets me connect to certain ports</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Your anti-virus program is blocking Tor</strong>: Make sure that your anti-virus program is not preventing Tor from making network connections.</p>
    <p>If Tor still doesn't work, it's likely that your Internet Service Provider (ISP) is blocking Tor. Very often this can be worked around with <strong>Tor bridges</strong>, hidden relays that aren't as easy to block.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">How to find a bridge</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configuring more than one bridge address will make your Tor connection more stable, in case some of the bridges become unreachable. There is no guarantee that the bridge you are using now will work tomorrow, so you should make a habit of updating your list of bridges every so often.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">How to use a bridge</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">Jak używać open proxy</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>The steps below assume you have a functional Tor/Vidalia configuration, and you have found a list of HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5 proxies.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>.</li>
      <li>Click <em>Network</em>. Select <em>I use a proxy to access the Internet</em>.</li>
      <li>On the <em>Address</em> line, enter the open proxy address. This can be a hostname or an IP Address.</li>
      <li>Enter the port for the proxy.</li>
      <li>Generally, you do not need a username and password. If you do, enter the information in the proper fields.</li>
      <li>Choose the <em>Type</em> of proxy you are using, whether HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Push the <em>OK</em> button. Vidalia and Tor are now configured to use a proxy to access the rest of the Tor network.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Często zadawane pytania</h2>
    <p>This section will answer some of the most common questions. If your question is not mentioned here, please send an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Unable to extract the archive</h3>
    <p>If you are using Windows and find that you cannot extract the archive, download and install <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>My Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Tools</em> and choose <em>Folder Options...</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia asks for a password</h3>
    <p>You should not have to enter a password when starting Vidalia. If you are prompted for one, you are likely affected by one of these problems:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>For more information, see the <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> on the Tor Project website.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Nie działa Flash</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, Flash, Java, and other plugins are currently disabled for Tor. Plugins operate independently from Firefox and can perform activity on your computer that ruins your anonymity.</p>
    <p>Most YouTube videos work with HTML5, and it is possible to view these videos over Tor. You need to join the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 trial</a> on the YouTube website before you can use the HTML5 player.</p>
    <p>Note that the browser will not remember that you joined the trial once you close it, so you will need to re-join the trial the next time you run the Tor Browser Bundle.</p>
    <p>Please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> for more information.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">Chcę używać innej przeglądarki</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, we recommend that you only browse the web through Tor using the Tor Browser Bundle. It is technically possible to use Tor with other browsers, but by doing so you open yourself up to potential attacks.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">Dlaczego Tor jest powolny</h3>
    <p>Tor can sometimes be a bit slower than your normal Internet connection. After all, your traffic is sent through many different countries, sometimes across oceans around the world!</p>
  </body>
</html>
