<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">짧은 사용자 매뉴얼</h1>
    <p>이 이용자 매뉴얼에는 Tor을 다운로드할 수 있는 방법과, 사용법, Tor가 네트워크에 접속할 수 없을 때 대처법이 포함되어 있습니다. 이 문서를 보고도 해결되지 않는 질문이 있다면, help@rt.torproject.org 으로 메일을 보내주세요.</p>
    <p>단, 지원은 자발적인 봉사로만 제공하고 있고, 매일 받는 메일이 많다는 점을 유념해 주세요. 당장 답장이 오지 않더라도 걱정하지 않으셔도 됩니다.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">Tor가 동작하는 원리</h2>
    <p>Tor는 가상 터널로 구성된 네트워크이며 인터넷에서 당신의 익명성과 보안성을 개선시키는 데 도움을 줍니다. Tor는 당신의 트래픽을 Tor 네트워크 안에 있는 임의의 서버 3대 (다른 말로는 <em>릴레이</em>) 를 통과시킨 후에야 공개된 인터넷으로 내보냅니다.</p>
    <p>위에 보이는 그림은 Tor을 통해 여러 웹사이트를 돌아다니는 이용자를 보여주고 있습니다. 녹색 모니터는 Tor 네트워크 안에 있는 릴레이를 상징하고, 세 개의 열쇠는 이용자와 각 릴레이간의 암호화 레이어를 의미합니다.</p>
    <p>Tor는 트래픽이 어디에서 오는지 알 수 없도록 익명으로 만들어 줍니다. 당신과 Tor 네트워크 사이에 모든 걸 암호화시킨다는 얘기죠. 또한 Tor 네트워크 안에서도 트래픽을 암호화시켜 줍니다. 다만 Tor 네트워크와 최종 목적지 간에는 암호화되지 않습니다.</p>
    <p>만약 민감한 정보를 주고받으실 경우라면, 이를테면 id와 비밀번호로 웹사이트에 로그인을 하실 경우, 반드시 HTTPS를 사용하도록 하십시오. (즉, <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/ 가 아니라 <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/ 이어야 합니다.)</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">Tor를 다운로드하는 방법</h2>
    <p>대부분의 이용자에게 추천하는 번들은 <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor 브라우저 번들</a> 입니다. 이 번들에는 브라우저가 들어 있는데, 설치할 필요 없이 처음부터 Tor를 통해 안전하게 브라우징을 할 수 있도록 설정이 다 되어 있습니다. 반들을 다운로드하시고, 압축을 푸신 후, Tor를 실행시면 됩니다.</p>
    <p>Tor 소프트웨어를 얻을 수 있는 방법에는 두 가지가 있습니다. <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">Tor 프로젝트 웹사이트</a>에 접속해서 다운로드하시거나, GetTor 이라고 하는 이메일 자동 답장기를 이용하실 수 있습니다.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">이메일로 Tor를 얻을 수 있는 방법</h3>
    <p>윈도우즈용 영문 Tor 브라우저 번들을 얻으려면, gettor@torproject.org 로 이메일을 보내실 때 내용란에 <strong>windows</strong> 라고 입력해 넣으세요. 제목은 비워 두셔도 됩니다.</p>
    <p>그 밖에 애플 맥 OS X 용 Tor 브라우저 번들 (<strong>macos-i386</strong> 이라고 표시), 리눅스용 (32-bit 체제는 <strong>linux-i386</strong>, 64-bit 체제는 <strong>linux-x86_64</strong>이라고 표시) 도 요청하실 수 있습니다.</p>
    <p>번역된 Tor 버전을 원하신다면, 위 내용 대신에 <strong>help</strong>이라고 적어주세요. 답장으로 오는 이메일을 열어보시면 설명과 함께 이용 가능한 언어 목록이 보일 것입니다.</p>
    <p><strong>주의</strong>: 리눅스용과 맥 OS X용 Tor 브라우저 번들은 용량이 상당히 크며, 지메일, Hotmail, 야후 같은 무료 계정을 통해서는 다운 받지 못할 것입니다. 원하시는 번들을 얻지 못하신다면, help@rt.torproject.org 로 이멜을 보내주십시오. 이용 가능한 웹사이트 미러 목룍을 보내드립니다.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">스마트폰용 Tor</h3>
    <p>안드로이드 폰에서는 <em>Orbot</em>이라는 이름의 패키지를 설치해서 Tor을 이용할 수 있습니다. Orbot을 내려받고 설치하는 방법에 대해서는, <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en">Tor 프로젝트 웹사이트</a>를 참고해 주십시오.</p>
    <p>We also have experimental packages for <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">제대로 된 버전을 가지고 있는지 확인하는 방법</h3>
    <p>Tor 브라우저 번들을 실행하기에 앞서, 올바른 버전을 입수했는지 확인하실 필요가 있습니다.</p>
    <p>받으신 소프트웨어에는 <strong>.asc</strong>확장자가 붙은 파일이 함께 제공되는데, 파일명이 번들의 파일명과 꼭 같을 것입니다. 이 .asc 파일은 GPG 서명이며, 다운받으신 파일이 과연 이 전자서명과 일치하는지 확인이 가능합니다.</p>
    <p>전자서명을 확인하기에 앞서, GnuPG를 다운받아 설치하셔야 합니다:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Most Linux distributions come with GnuPG preinstalled.</p>
    <p>단, 아래에 표시된 내용 중 본인의 운영체제에 맞게 경로명과 명령어를 바꿔줘야 할 지도 모릅니다.</p>
    <p>에린 클라크라는 사람이 Tor 브라우저 번들을 0x63FEE659 이라는 키로 서명했군요. 에린의 키를 가져오려면 다음의 명령어를 넣으십시오:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net --recv-keys 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>키를 가져오기한 후, 해당 지문이 올바른지 확인합니다:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --fingerprint 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>다음의 결과가 나와야 합니다:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub   2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
      Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630  F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;

uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub   2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>다운로드하신 패키지의 서명이 올바른지 확인하시려면, 다음의 멍령어를 입력하세요:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe
</code>
    </pre>
    <p><em>"Good signature"</em> 라는 결과가 떠야 합니다. 나쁜 시그니처라면 누군가가 파일에 손을 댔을 가능성이 있다는 뜻입니다. 만약 나쁜 시그니처를 발견하신다면, 저희에게 연락하실 때 어디서 패키지를 다운로드하셨는지, 어떻게 서명을 확인하셨는지, 그리고 GnuPG의 출력값이 어떻게 되는지 알려주시기 바랍니다. 연락처는 help@rt.torproject.org 입니다.</p>
    <p>일단 서명을 확인하셨고 <em>"Good signature"</em> 출력값이 나왔다면, 걱정 없이 패키지 압축을 푸셔도 됩니다. 폴더명이 <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong> 라는 식으로 되어 있는 것을 보실 겁니다. 폴더 안에는 <strong>Docs</strong>이라는 제목의 폴더가 들어 있는데, 이걸 열어 보시면 <strong>changelog</strong>이라는 파일이 들어 있습니다. changelog 파일의 첫 줄이, 파일명에 포함된 버전과 꼭 맞는지 확인하시는게 좋습니다.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">Tor 브라우저 번들 이용법</h3>
    <p>After downloading the Tor Browser Bundle and extracting the package, you should have a directory with a few files in it. One of the files is an executable called "Start Tor Browser" (or "start-tor-browser", depending on your operating system).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Please note that it is important that you use the browser that comes with the bundle, and not your own browser.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">What to do when Tor does not connect</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>Your system clock is off</strong>: Make sure that the date and time on your system is correct, and restart Tor. You may need to synchronize your system clock with an Internet time server.</p>
    <p><strong>You are behind a restrictive firewall</strong>: To tell Tor to only try port 80 and port 443, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em> and <em>Network</em>, and tick the box that says <em>My firewall only lets me connect to certain ports</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Your anti-virus program is blocking Tor</strong>: Make sure that your anti-virus program is not preventing Tor from making network connections.</p>
    <p>If Tor still doesn't work, it's likely that your Internet Service Provider (ISP) is blocking Tor. Very often this can be worked around with <strong>Tor bridges</strong>, hidden relays that aren't as easy to block.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">브릿지 찾는 법</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configuring more than one bridge address will make your Tor connection more stable, in case some of the bridges become unreachable. There is no guarantee that the bridge you are using now will work tomorrow, so you should make a habit of updating your list of bridges every so often.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">브릿지 사용법</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">프록시 여는 법</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>The steps below assume you have a functional Tor/Vidalia configuration, and you have found a list of HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5 proxies.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>.</li>
      <li>Click <em>Network</em>. Select <em>I use a proxy to access the Internet</em>.</li>
      <li>On the <em>Address</em> line, enter the open proxy address. This can be a hostname or an IP Address.</li>
      <li>Enter the port for the proxy.</li>
      <li>Generally, you do not need a username and password. If you do, enter the information in the proper fields.</li>
      <li>Choose the <em>Type</em> of proxy you are using, whether HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Push the <em>OK</em> button. Vidalia and Tor are now configured to use a proxy to access the rest of the Tor network.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Frequently Asked Questions</h2>
    <p>This section will answer some of the most common questions. If your question is not mentioned here, please send an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Unable to extract the archive</h3>
    <p>If you are using Windows and find that you cannot extract the archive, download and install <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>My Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Tools</em> and choose <em>Folder Options...</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia asks for a password</h3>
    <p>You should not have to enter a password when starting Vidalia. If you are prompted for one, you are likely affected by one of these problems:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>For more information, see the <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> on the Tor Project website.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Flash does not work</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, Flash, Java, and other plugins are currently disabled for Tor. Plugins operate independently from Firefox and can perform activity on your computer that ruins your anonymity.</p>
    <p>Most YouTube videos work with HTML5, and it is possible to view these videos over Tor. You need to join the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 trial</a> on the YouTube website before you can use the HTML5 player.</p>
    <p>Note that the browser will not remember that you joined the trial once you close it, so you will need to re-join the trial the next time you run the Tor Browser Bundle.</p>
    <p>Please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> for more information.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">I want to use another browser</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, we recommend that you only browse the web through Tor using the Tor Browser Bundle. It is technically possible to use Tor with other browsers, but by doing so you open yourself up to potential attacks.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">Why Tor is slow</h3>
    <p>Tor can sometimes be a bit slower than your normal Internet connection. After all, your traffic is sent through many different countries, sometimes across oceans around the world!</p>
  </body>
</html>
