<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">Krátka Užívateľská Príručka</h1>
    <p>Táto užívateľská príručka obsahuje informácie o tom, ako stiahnuť Tor, používať ho a čo robiť, ak sa nemôže pripojiť na sieť. Ak nemôžete nájsť odpoveď na svoju otázku v tomto dokumente, kontaktujte help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Vezmite prosím na vedomie, že poskytujeme podporu na dobrovoľnej činnosti a každý deň dostávame mnoho emailov. Ak sa Vám neozveme okamžite, netreba sa báť.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">Ako funguje Tor</h2>
    <p>Tor je sieť virtuálnych tunelov, ktoré umožňujú vylepšiť Vaše súkromie a bezpečnosť na Internete. Tor funguje tak, že posiela Vaše dáta cez tri náhodné servery (tiež známe ako <em>relé</em>) v sieti Tor predtým, než ich odošle na verejný Internet.</p>
    <p>Obrázok vyššie ukazuje používateľa prechádzajúceho rôznymi stránkami cez Tor. Zelené monitory reprezentujú relé v sieti Tor, zatiaľ čo tri kľúče reprezentujú vrstvy šifrovania medzi užívateľom a každým relé.</p>
    <p>Tor anonymizuje pôvod Vašich dát a šifruje všetko medzi Vami a sieťou Tor. Tor taktiež šifruje Vaše dáta v sieti Tor, ale nemôže šifrovať Vašu komunikáciu medzi sieťou Tor a jej cieľom.</p>
    <p>Ak prenášate citlivé informácie, napríklad keď sa prihlasujete na stránku s menom a heslom, uistite sa že používate HTTPS (napr. <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/, nie <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/).</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">Ako stiahnuť Tor</h2>
    <p>Balíček, ktorý odporúčame pre väčšinu užívateľov je <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor Browser Bundle</a>. Tneto balíček obsahuje prednastavený prehliadač a nevyžaduje inštaláciu. Stačí balíček stiahnuť, rozbaliť archív a spustiť Tor.</p>
    <p>Existujú dva spôsoby ako získať softvér Tor. Môžete buď navštíviť  <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">stránku Projektu Tor</a> a stiahnuť ho tam, alebo môžete použiť GetTor, emailového robota.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">Ako získať Tor cez email</h3>
    <p>Ak chcete prijať anglickú verziu Prehliadača Tor pre Windows, pošlite email na gettor@torproject.org so správou <strong>windows</strong>. Predmet správy môžete nechať prázdny.</p>
    <p>Taktiež môžete požiadať o Prehliadač Tor pre Mac OS X (napíšte <strong>macos-i386</strong>) a Linux (napíšte <strong>linux-i386</strong> pre 32-bitové systémy alebo <strong>linux-x86_64</strong> pre 64-bitové systémy).</p>
    <p>Ak chcete preloženú verziu Tor, napíšte do tela správy <strong>help</strong>. Obdržíte email s inštrukciami a zoznamom dostupných jazykov.</p>
    <p><strong>Poznámka</strong>: Prehliadač Tor pre Linux a Mac OS X sú pomerne veľké a nebudete ich môcť prijať na účty Gmail, Hotmail alebo Yahoo. Ak nemôžete prijať balík ktorý chcete, pošlite email na help@rt.torproject.org a my Vám dáme zoznam stránok odkiaľ je možné stiahnuť prehliadač.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">Tor pre smartfóny</h3>
    <p>Môžete získať Tor na Vaše Android zariadenie tak, že nainštalujete balík s názvom <em>Orbot</em>. Pre informácie o tom ako stiahnuť a nainštalovať Orbot prosím navštívte <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en">stránku Projektu Tor</a>.</p>
    <p>We also have experimental packages for <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">Ako overiť či máte správnu verziu</h3>
    <p>Pred spustením Balíčka Prehliadača Tor, uistite sa že máte správnu verziu.</p>
    <p>Softvér ktorý obdržíte je doprevádzaný so súborom s rovnakým názvom ako balíček a s koncovkou <strong>.asc</strong>. Tento .asc súbor je GPG podpis a umožňuje Vám overiť, že ste si stiahli presne ten súbor, ktorý ste mali v úmysle.</p>
    <p>Predtým, než môžete overiť podpis, budete musieť stiahnuť a nainštalovať GnuPG:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Most Linux distributions come with GnuPG preinstalled.</p>
    <p>Vezmite prosím na vedomie, že možno bude potrebné upraviť cesty k súborom a príkazy použité nižšie aby sa to dalo použiť na Vašom systéme.</p>
    <p>Erinn Clark signs the Tor Browser Bundles with key 0x63FEE659. To import Erinn's key, run:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net  --recv-keys 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>After importing the key, verify that the fingerprint is correct:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg  --fingerprint 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>Mali by ste vidieť:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub   2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
      Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630  F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;

uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub   2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>To verify the signature of the package you downloaded, run the following command:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>The output should say <em>"Good signature"</em>. A bad signature means that the file may have been tampered with. If you see a bad signature, send details about where you downloaded the package from, how you verified the signature, and the output from GnuPG in an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Once you have verified the signature and seen the <em>"Good signature"</em> output, go ahead and extract the package archive. You should then see a directory similar to <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong>. Inside that directory is another directory called <strong>Docs</strong>, which contains a file called <strong>changelog</strong>. You want to make sure that the version number on the top line of the changelog file matches the version number in the filename.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">How to use the Tor Browser Bundle</h3>
    <p>After downloading the Tor Browser Bundle and extracting the package, you should have a directory with a few files in it. One of the files is an executable called "Start Tor Browser" (or "start-tor-browser", depending on your operating system).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Vezmite prosím na vedomie, že je dôležité používať prehliadač ktorý obsahuje inštalačný balíček a nie svoj vlastný.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">Čo robiť keď sa Tor nepripojí</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>Your system clock is off</strong>: Make sure that the date and time on your system is correct, and restart Tor. You may need to synchronize your system clock with an Internet time server.</p>
    <p><strong>You are behind a restrictive firewall</strong>: To tell Tor to only try port 80 and port 443, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em> and <em>Network</em>, and tick the box that says <em>My firewall only lets me connect to certain ports</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Your anti-virus program is blocking Tor</strong>: Make sure that your anti-virus program is not preventing Tor from making network connections.</p>
    <p>If Tor still doesn't work, it's likely that your Internet Service Provider (ISP) is blocking Tor. Very often this can be worked around with <strong>Tor bridges</strong>, hidden relays that aren't as easy to block.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">How to find a bridge</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configuring more than one bridge address will make your Tor connection more stable, in case some of the bridges become unreachable. There is no guarantee that the bridge you are using now will work tomorrow, so you should make a habit of updating your list of bridges every so often.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">Ako používať premostenie</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">Ako požívať otvorenú proxy</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>The steps below assume you have a functional Tor/Vidalia configuration, and you have found a list of HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5 proxies.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>.</li>
      <li>Click <em>Network</em>. Select <em>I use a proxy to access the Internet</em>.</li>
      <li>On the <em>Address</em> line, enter the open proxy address. This can be a hostname or an IP Address.</li>
      <li>Vložte port pre proxy.</li>
      <li>Generally, you do not need a username and password. If you do, enter the information in the proper fields.</li>
      <li>Choose the <em>Type</em> of proxy you are using, whether HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Push the <em>OK</em> button. Vidalia and Tor are now configured to use a proxy to access the rest of the Tor network.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Frequently Asked Questions</h2>
    <p>This section will answer some of the most common questions. If your question is not mentioned here, please send an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Unable to extract the archive</h3>
    <p>If you are using Windows and find that you cannot extract the archive, download and install <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>My Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Tools</em> and choose <em>Folder Options...</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Otvor <em>Počítač</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Otvor <em>Počítač</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia asks for a password</h3>
    <p>You should not have to enter a password when starting Vidalia. If you are prompted for one, you are likely affected by one of these problems:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>For more information, see the <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> on the Tor Project website.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Flash nefunguje</h3>
    <p>Kvôli bezpečnostným dôvodom sú Flash, Java a ostatné doplnky momentálny vypnuté. Doplnky fungujú nezávisle od Firefoxu a môžu vykonávať aktivity na Vašom počítači, ktoré zničia Vašu anonymitu.</p>
    <p>Most YouTube videos work with HTML5, and it is possible to view these videos over Tor. You need to join the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 trial</a> on the YouTube website before you can use the HTML5 player.</p>
    <p>Note that the browser will not remember that you joined the trial once you close it, so you will need to re-join the trial the next time you run the Tor Browser Bundle.</p>
    <p>Please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> for more information.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">Chcem použiť iný prehliadač</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, we recommend that you only browse the web through Tor using the Tor Browser Bundle. It is technically possible to use Tor with other browsers, but by doing so you open yourself up to potential attacks.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">Prečo je Tor pomalý</h3>
    <p>Tor môže byť niekedy pomalší než Vaše normálne Internetové pripojenie. Napokon Vaše dáta sú posielané cez mnoho rôznych krajín, niekedy cez oceány okolo sveta!</p>
  </body>
</html>
