<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
    <title/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1 id="the-short-user-manual">The Short User Manual</h1>
    <p>Este manual contém informações sobre como baixar o Tor, como usá-lo, e o que fazer se o Tor estiver disponível para se conectar à Internet. Se você não conseguir encontrar a resposta para sua questão neste documento, envie um e-mail para help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Por favor, note que nós provemos suporte através de bases voluntárias, e temos vários e-mails todo dia. Não há motivo para se preocupar se não retornarmos à você rapidamente.</p>
    <h2 id="how-tor-works">Como Tor funciona</h2>
    <p>Tor é uma rede com túneis virtuais que permitem a você manter sua privacidade e segurança na Internet. Tor trabalha enviando seu tráfego através de 3 servidores aleatórios (também conhecidos como retransmissores) na rede Tor, antes do tráfego ser enviado para a Internet pública.</p>
    <p>A imagem abaixo ilustra um usuário navegando através de diversos sites usando Tor. As telas verdes representam retransmissores dentro da rede Tor, enquanto as três chaves representam as camadas de encriptação entre o usuário e cada retransmissor.</p>
    <p>Tor vai deixar a origem do seu tráfego anônima, e irá encriptar tudo que passar entre você e a rede Tor. Tor também irá encriptar seu tráfego dentro da rede Tor, mas não pode encriptar seu tráfego entre a rede Tor e o destino final.</p>
    <p>Se você está enviando informações confidenciais, como um nome de usuário e senha, tenha certeza de que está usando HTTPS (ex: <strong>https</strong>://torproject.org/, e não <strong>http</strong>://torproject.org/).</p>
    <h2 id="how-to-download-tor">Como baixar o Tor</h2>
    <p>O pacote que recomendamos para a maioria dos usuário é o <a href="https://www.torproject.org/projects/torbrowser.html">Tor Browser Bundle</a>. Este pacote contém um navegador pré configurado para navegar seguramente através do Tor, e não requer instalação. Você baixa o pacote, extrai o arquivo, e inicia o Tor.</p>
    <p>There are two different ways to get hold of the Tor software. You can either browse to the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/">Tor Project website</a> and download it there, or you can use GetTor, the email autoresponder.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-get-tor-via-email">How to get Tor via email</h3>
    <p>To receive the English Tor Browser Bundle for Windows, send an email to gettor@torproject.org with <strong>windows</strong> in the body of the message. You can leave the subject blank.</p>
    <p>You can also request the Tor Browser Bundle for Mac OS X (write <strong>macos-i386</strong>), and Linux (write <strong>linux-i386</strong> for 32-bit systems or <strong>linux-x86_64</strong> for 64-bit systems).</p>
    <p>If you want a translated version of Tor, write <strong>help</strong> instead. You will then receive an email with instructions and a list of available languages.</p>
    <p><strong>Nota</strong>: Os pacotes do Tor Browser para Mac OS X e Linux são maiores, e você não estará habilitado para recebê-los através do Gmail, Hotmail ou Yahoo. Se você não receber o pacote que escolheu, envie um e-mail para help@rt.torproject.org e nós daremos a você uma lista de sites de onde poderá baixá-lo.</p>
    <h3 id="tor-for-smartphones">Tor for smartphones</h3>
    <p>You can get Tor on your Android device by installing the package named <em>Orbot</em>. For information about how to download and install Orbot, please see the <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/android.html.en">Tor Project website</a>.</p>
    <p>We also have experimental packages for <a href="https://www.torproject.org/docs/N900.html.en">Nokia Maemo/N900</a> and <a href="http://sid77.slackware.it/iphone/">Apple iOS</a>.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-verify-that-you-have-the-right-version">How to verify that you have the right version</h3>
    <p>Before running the Tor Browser Bundle, you should make sure that you have the right version.</p>
    <p>The software you receive is accompanied by a file with the same name as the bundle and the extension <strong>.asc</strong>. This .asc file is a GPG signature, and will allow you to verify the file you've downloaded is exactly the one that we intended you to get.</p>
    <p>Before you can verify the signature, you will have to download and install GnuPG:</p>
    <p><strong>Windows</strong>: <a href="http://gpg4win.org/download.html">http://gpg4win.org/download.html</a><br/><strong>Mac OS X</strong>: <a href="http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/">http://macgpg.sourceforge.net/</a><br/><strong>Linux</strong>: Most Linux distributions come with GnuPG preinstalled.</p>
    <p>Please note that you may need to edit the paths and the commands used below to get it to work on your system.</p>
    <p>Erinn Clark signs the Tor Browser Bundles with key 0x63FEE659. To import Erinn's key, run:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --keyserver hkp://keys.gnupg.net  --recv-keys 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>After importing the key, verify that the fingerprint is correct:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg  --fingerprint 0x63FEE659
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>You should see:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>pub   2048R/63FEE659 2003-10-16
      Key fingerprint = 8738 A680 B84B 3031 A630  F2DB 416F 0610 63FE E659
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@torproject.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@debian.org&gt;
uid                  Erinn Clark &lt;erinn@double-helix.org&gt;
sub   2048R/EB399FD7 2003-10-16
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>To verify the signature of the package you downloaded, run the following command:</p>
    <pre>
      <code>gpg --verify tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe.asc tor-browser-2.2.33-2_en-US.exe
</code>
    </pre>
    <p>The output should say <em>"Good signature"</em>. A bad signature means that the file may have been tampered with. If you see a bad signature, send details about where you downloaded the package from, how you verified the signature, and the output from GnuPG in an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <p>Uma vez que você tenha verificado a assinatura e viu a saída <strong>"Good signature"</strong>, vá em frente e extraia o arquivo package. Você deve ver um diretório similiar a <strong>tor-browser_en-US</strong>. Dentro do diretório está outro diretório chamado <strong>Docs</strong>, que contém um arquivo chamado <strong>changelog</strong>. Você quer ter certeza de que a versão no topo do arquivo changelog corresponde ao número da versão no arquivo.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-the-tor-browser-bundle">How to use the Tor Browser Bundle</h3>
    <p>After downloading the Tor Browser Bundle and extracting the package, you should have a directory with a few files in it. One of the files is an executable called "Start Tor Browser" (or "start-tor-browser", depending on your operating system).</p>
    <p>When you start the Tor Browser Bundle, you will first see Vidalia start up and connect you to the Tor network. After that, you will see a browser confirming that you are now using Tor. This is done by displaying <a href="https://check.torproject.org/">https://check.torproject.org/</a>. You can now browse the Internet through Tor.</p>
    <p>
      <em>Please note that it is important that you use the browser that comes with the bundle, and not your own browser.</em>
    </p>
    <h3 id="what-to-do-when-tor-does-not-connect">What to do when Tor does not connect</h3>
    <p>Some users will notice that Vidalia gets stuck when trying to connect to the Tor network. If this happens, make sure that you are connected to the Internet. If you need to connect to a proxy server, see <em>How to use an open proxy</em> below.</p>
    <p>If your normal Internet connection is working, but Tor still can't connect to the network, try the following; open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Message Log</em> and select the <em>Advanced</em> tab. It may be that Tor won't connect because:</p>
    <p><strong>O relógio do seu sistema está errado</strong>: garanta que a data e horário do seu sistema estão corretos e reinicie o Tor. Pode ser necessário que você sincronize o relógio do sistema com um servidor de horário na internet.</p>
    <p><strong>Você está atrás de um firewall restritivo</strong>: Para que o Tor tente usar apenas as portas 80 e 443, abra o painel de controle do Vidalia, clique em <em>Configurações</em>, depois em
<em>Rede</em>, e marque a caixa que diz <em>A minha firewall apenas permite a conexão a certas portas</em>.</p>
    <p><strong>Seu antivírus está bloqueando o Tor</strong>: Garanta que seu antivírus não esteja impedindo o Tor de fazer conexões de rede.</p>
    <p>Se o Tor ainda não está funcionando, é provável que o seu Fornecedor de Acesso à Internet (ISP) esteja bloqueando Tor. Muito frequentemente, isso pode ser corrigido usando <strong>pontes doTor</strong>, retransmissores escondidos que não são tão fáceis de bloquear.</p>
    <p>If you need help with figuring out why Tor can't connect, send an email to help@rt.torproject.org and include the relevant parts from the log file.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-find-a-bridge">How to find a bridge</h3>
    <p>To use a bridge, you will first have to locate one; you can either browse to <a href="https://bridges.torproject.org/">bridges.torproject.org</a>, or you can send an email to bridges@torproject.org. If you do send an email, please make sure that you write <strong>get bridges</strong> in the body of the email. Without this, you will not get a reply. Note that you need to send this email from either a gmail.com or a yahoo.com address.</p>
    <p>Configurar mais que um endereço ponte deixará a sua conexão com o Tor mais estável, no caso de alguma das pontes se tornar inacessível. Não há garantia de que a ponte que você está usando agora irá funcionar amanhã, então você deveria ter o hábito de atualizar a sua lista de pontes frequentemente.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-a-bridge">How to use a bridge</h3>
    <p>Once you have a set of bridges to use, open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>, <em>Network</em> and tick the box that says <em>My ISP blocks connections to the Tor network</em>. Enter the bridges in the box below, hit <em>OK</em> and start Tor again.</p>
    <h3 id="how-to-use-an-open-proxy">How to use an open proxy</h3>
    <p>If using a bridge does not work, try configuring Tor to use any HTTPS or SOCKS proxy to get access to the Tor network. This means even if Tor is blocked by your local network, open proxies can be safely used to connect to the Tor Network and on to the uncensored Internet.</p>
    <p>Os próximos passos assumem que você tem uma configuração Tor/Vidalia funcional e que você achou uma lista de proxies HTTPS, SOCKS4 ou SOCKS5.</p>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open the Vidalia control panel, click on <em>Settings</em>.</li>
      <li>Click <em>Network</em>. Select <em>I use a proxy to access the Internet</em>.</li>
      <li>On the <em>Address</em> line, enter the open proxy address. This can be a hostname or an IP Address.</li>
      <li>Enter the port for the proxy.</li>
      <li>Generally, you do not need a username and password. If you do, enter the information in the proper fields.</li>
      <li>Choose the <em>Type</em> of proxy you are using, whether HTTP/HTTPS, SOCKS4, or SOCKS5.</li>
      <li>Push the <em>OK</em> button. Vidalia and Tor are now configured to use a proxy to access the rest of the Tor network.</li>
    </ol>
    <h2 id="frequently-asked-questions">Frequently Asked Questions</h2>
    <p>This section will answer some of the most common questions. If your question is not mentioned here, please send an email to help@rt.torproject.org.</p>
    <h3 id="unable-to-extract-the-archive">Unable to extract the archive</h3>
    <p>If you are using Windows and find that you cannot extract the archive, download and install <a href="http://www.7-zip.org/">7-Zip</a>.</p>
    <p>If you are unable to download 7-Zip, try to rename the file from .z to .zip and use winzip to extract the archive. Before renaming the file, tell Windows to show file extensions:</p>
    <h4 id="windows-xp">Windows XP</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>My Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Tools</em> and choose <em>Folder Options...</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-vista">Windows Vista</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h4 id="windows-7">Windows 7</h4>
    <ol style="list-style-type: decimal">
      <li>Open <em>Computer</em></li>
      <li>Click on <em>Organize</em> and choose <em>Folder and search options</em> in the menu</li>
      <li>Click on the <em>View</em> tab</li>
      <li>Uncheck <em>Hide extensions for known file types</em> and click <em>OK</em></li>
    </ol>
    <h3 id="vidalia-asks-for-a-password">Vidalia asks for a password</h3>
    <p>You should not have to enter a password when starting Vidalia. If you are prompted for one, you are likely affected by one of these problems:</p>
    <p><strong>You are already running Vidalia and Tor</strong>: For example, this situation can happen if you installed the Vidalia bundle and now you're trying to run the Tor Browser Bundle. In that case, you will need to close the old Vidalia and Tor before you can run this one.</p>
    <p><strong>Vidalia crashed, but left Tor running</strong>: If the dialog that prompts you for a control password has a Reset button, you can click the button and Vidalia will restart Tor with a new random control password. If you do not see a Reset button, or if Vidalia is unable to restart Tor for you; go into your process or task manager, and terminate the Tor process. Then use Vidalia to restart Tor.</p>
    <p>For more information, see the <a href="https://torproject.org/docs/faq.html#VidaliaPassword">FAQ</a> on the Tor Project website.</p>
    <h3 id="flash-does-not-work">Flash does not work</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, Flash, Java, and other plugins are currently disabled for Tor. Plugins operate independently from Firefox and can perform activity on your computer that ruins your anonymity.</p>
    <p>A maioria dos vídeos do Youtube funciona com HTML5 e é possível assistir a esses vídeos com o Tor. Você precisa aceitar o <a href="https://www.youtube.com/html5">HTML5 experimental</a> no site do Youtube antes de usar o player com HTML5.</p>
    <p>Note que o browser não vai lembrar que você aceitou o HTML5 experimental quando você fechá-lo, então você vai precisar aceitá-lo novamente da próxima vez que utilizar o Pacote do Tor Browser.</p>
    <p>Veja o <a href="https://www.torproject.org/torbutton/torbutton-faq.html#noflash">Torbutton FAQ</a> para mais informações.</p>
    <h3 id="i-want-to-use-another-browser">I want to use another browser</h3>
    <p>For security reasons, we recommend that you only browse the web through Tor using the Tor Browser Bundle. It is technically possible to use Tor with other browsers, but by doing so you open yourself up to potential attacks.</p>
    <h3 id="why-tor-is-slow">Why Tor is slow</h3>
    <p>Tor can sometimes be a bit slower than your normal Internet connection. After all, your traffic is sent through many different countries, sometimes across oceans around the world!</p>
  </body>
</html>
